[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We are all in an elaborate
universal dance at all times.
But we may not always be aware
of the multitude of dance
partners, or the
rhythm of the music.
It's constant poetry in motion.
Nature actually plays an
orchestra 24 hours a day,
seven days a week.
Not only do you have
the tides of the ocean,
we have the sound of trees
rustling in the wind.
We recognize in most
parts of the world
the four seasons, all the
different rain cycles, and all
the different dry periods.
We realize that
this planet itself
is just one harmonious entity,
and just like the human body,
we are creating our blood cells
and regenerating ourselves
on a consistent basis.
Earth is doing the
same exact thing.
As above so below.
>> So the rhythms in nature
are very clearly a reflection
of cosmic cycles, and we can
see that just, for example,
with the day/night cycle.
The Earth rotating on its axis.
But we also have
greater cosmic cycles
of our solar system rotating
around the galactic core
of the Milky Way galaxy.
And then you can go even further
and further and further out
that there's cycles within
cycles within cycles,
all of which are representing
some kind of a cosmic dance,
a cosmic harmony.
>> From the macro to the micro,
everything is in a rhythmic
flow of change.
>> From the electron moving
around the nucleus of an atom
to planets and distant galaxies
moving around their suns,
they're all in a
state of vibration.
Whether or not we can hear that
vibration is another story.
They are all in a
state of vibration.
>> The dance persists at every
frequency scale of the spectrum
within and around each of us.
>> There's a magnetic field that
emanates from this planet that
underlies all existence
of all living creatures.
Every blade of grass,
every dog, every cat,
every CEO of every corporation,
every leader of every nation
is linked to these
magnetic fields
and they have a
frequency, they have
a vibration that influences
their ability to cooperate
or their willingness
for competition.
>> And this includes our body--
every organ, every bone, every
tissue, every part of our body
is in a state of
vibration, it's in a state
of normal healthy resonance.
And when we say we're healthy,
we say we're in sound health.
>> To understand the mysteries
of the sound behind creation,
we need to first identify
the patterns which underlie
the rhythms of form.
>> Nature is based upon the
replication and duplication
of only a very few patterns
in rhythms and cycles.
One of the most foundational
is the phi or the phi ratio,
0.618 to the tip of
our finger to our hand,
and from the tip of
our hand to our wrist,
and our wrist to our elbow.
From where eyes are in
relationship to our nose
and our mouth and our head.
Our entire bodies are
based upon this principle.
>> We can witness this principle
also called the Fibonacci
sequence everywhere around us.
>> It's reflected
holographically throughout
nature.
As trees grow, the
leaves or the branches
will start to arrange themselves
according to the Fibonacci
sequence.
>> Patterns are also repeated
in nature's union of opposites,
which are demonstrated by
the spirals that can move
in opposite directions
in the growth of a plant.
A plant or a tree is not a
singular or independent force.
Nothing in creation
operates alone.
This is one of the principles
that ties everything together.
>> You can think of all the
human activity having one sound
for the surface of our planet.
Or all the birds
having one sound,
like all the birds chirping
right now around the planet.
It's a beautiful harmonic.
And then you can imagine
all the leaves in the trees
all around the world
currently just oscillating
in the space because of
the wind, making one sound.
>> Harmonia is a group mind
phenomenon that the Greeks
described as being of one mind
together or a union of hearts.
In nature, we see schools
of fish, birds, ants, bees,
and many other species operating
as a kind of group mind.
>> So you can think of
different sets of information
or different structure of nature
as being different frequency
of this oscillation
of the space itself.
>> Ancient cultures have
known of this phenomenon
for centuries but the knowledge
has recently been rediscovered.
>> In the early 1900s with
the availability of electronic
instruments, Hans Jenny,
a Swiss medical doctor,
began the field of cymatics.
And the name cymatics comes
from the Greek word cyma,
meaning wave.
He would put sound vibrations
into different types
of materials.
It might be water, it might
be paste of particular types,
whatever sound he
fed into it, he
would then see immediately form
up into this beautiful mandala
pattern.
>> Now, if you know anything
about nature forms and cymatics
shows this beautifully, the
study of wave phenomenon,
how sound will create geometric
patterns that are analogs
to what you find in nature.
It can be the Fibonacci
series replicated in the way
that the daisy will
have its middle part
of its head or the sunflower.
Those tend to come out in a
specific sequence of arches
that happen repeatedly,
creating a pattern.
And then Lauterwasser,
or Alexander Lauterwasser
who is 50 years later, he
was able to create analogs
of nature forms that were so
precise that he could replicate
the entire cell structure.
You could look at that and
say that is a tortoise shell,
but no, it wasn't.
It was lycopodium
powder configured
with all the different aspects,
the polygon and the one part
here and the parts
around the edge.
The different fields were--
replicated that nature form
perfectly.
>> Cymatics captures some of
these amazing patterns that we
see in nature but the creation
of the human form is also
a part of this
universal phenomenon.
>> The ancient
mystery tradition,
we say man or human is
the measure of all things,
that we are the template,
that we are the blueprint,
that the tree of life,
for example, is our DNA.
>> We share 98% of our
DNA with other primates.
And the question that
I ask as a musician is
if I share 98% of my
DNA with a chimpanzee,
why have I never seen a
chimpanzee sing Led Zeppelin's
Stairway to Heaven?
And I haven't.
And we never will.
And it's because
something rare and sacred
and precious and
mysterious happened to us
200,000 years ago when
anatomically modern humans
emerged into this world.
There were a series of
rare genetic mutations
that'd never happened before and
they've never happened since.
We were given the
ability to connect
our tongue and our mouth
and our jaw and our brain
in a way that allows us through
our words to connect vibration
to the unseen world.
No other form of life has
the ability to do this.
And we do it so well we may
have forgotten how precious
this ability really is.
>> At some level, this world
was created for us to have this
physical experience from the
spiritual into the physical
so that we could learn
and grow from it.
>> What we know is that
vibration follows this pattern
as well.
And that when we choose to
solve our problems, to heal
our bodies in really, really
meaningful ways, that the more
we learn to honor and
work and cooperate
with these principles
of nature, the faster
we see the results because
we are bringing ourselves
into harmony with
the world around us.
>> When we are out of
alignment, is it possible
for the frequencies of nature
to provide the medicines
or remedies that can bring
us back into harmony?
>> Humans are part of the
symbiotic web of life,
but maybe because of free
will, we can choose to perceive
and act otherwise.
Sacred plant medicines
have been used
since the earliest
records of humans
for healing mind,
body, and spirit.
The frequency of the
consciousness of plants
is attuned or in train to
a symbiotic web of life
like a collective group mind.
All of nature exists in a kind
of universal harmony following
the patterns of creation as
seen in the sacred geometry
of their forms.
>> In any tradition,
Shipibo, Mestizo, Quechua,
the shamans have very
specific icaros that they use,
which are songs that were
taught to them by the plants.
[RITUAL SINGING]
They listen to the
plants and the plants
teach them these icaros
that are the frequency
signatures of that plant
to bring into a ceremony.
They use the icaros
as a technology
to help break up the energy
and allow the ayahuasca to work
and move throughout the body.
[RITUAL SINGING]
>> It's important for us
to recognize the different
frequencies of vibration within
the spectrum of creation.
>> There is a universal
vibrational spectrum that
contains all divine
powers inside of it.
That complete universal
spectrum can express itself
in light and color.
Or it can express
itself in sound,
or it can express itself
in angle, or proportion,
or number, or in
shape and geometry.
>> This is why math, music,
geometry are all actually
the same thing.
In fact, we could say that
geometry is simply the music
that we see with our eyes.
Instead of seeing the
music that we basically
experience with sound
and we experience
through our ears
and our hearing,
we're actually
experiencing music
but in a visual
form of experience.
And that's what
we call geometry.
>> Whenever we make
or hear a sound,
we're actually hearing complex
frequencies called harmonics.
And these harmonics are
responsible for the timbre
or tone color of sound
and they literally
can be artificially refracted
or even changed with our voice.
>> If you hold a
prism up to sunlight,
you can see all the colors of
the electromagnetic spectrum,
including red, orange,
yellow, green, blue, indigo,
and violet.
This is like the
phenomena of harmonics,
allowing us to see the
many colors of sound.
And yet audible sound
is separate from
the electromagnetic spectrum.
>> There is only one thing
in the universe that is not
on the electromagnetic
scale, and that's sound.
Sound is not electromagnetic.
It's separate.
It's the big yin
yang of the universe.
It's a pure energy
moving through a medium
at a certain frequency.
And when the frequency ranges
between 20 and 20,000 Hertz,
we happen to have developed this
little mechanism to interpret
that and we call it sound.
But if you strip
the sound word away,
it's part of a continuum
of vibrational frequencies
that go infinitely large and
infinitely small, infinitely
low and infinitely rapid.
And a little pie
wedge in the middle
here, this tells us that sound.
And below that, this
tells us it's vibration.
But it keeps going that way,
and it keeps going that way.
>> Another interesting
correlation exists between
chaos and coherence.
Cymatics demonstrates the
paradox between the two.
>> First thing it's going to do
has come out of its static form
and it's going to start
moving in a chaotic way.
So this chaotic form actually
has infinite potential
as to what it can do.
It is not random.
Random is an artifact
of perception,
and I'd say it's an
artifact of misperception,
not seeing the potential.
You just see the chaotic phase
as a thing in and of itself
rather than a process
in transition.
So as you bring
the frequency up,
it will inspire that chaotic
mode, that mode in the moment
to reconfigure itself but
it will reconfigure itself
at a higher order of
complexity and coherency.
>> I often think of how
in cymatic patterns when
the frequency changes, the
patterns become more complex.
It is possible that
because we are entering
a new astrological age,
the age of Aquarius,
it represents a
different frequency
pattern from the age we are
leaving, the age of Pisces.
There is a period
of chaos or I feel
it's similar to the static
between radio stations.
Possibly we are in
that period now,
between stations until the
new pattern reveals itself.
>> It's important to realize
that chaos eventually resolves
into coherence or reintegration
with the right frequency
and timing.
Perhaps, the same thing happens
within the natural world.
>> But if you keep the organism
within its comfortable bounds
of evolution and you
continually stimulate it,
you will find that you develop
more intricate neural pathways.
From a worm to a snake, to a
bird, to a mammal, to hominid,
to an Einstein,
the neural pathways
are going to be getting more
and more intricate, more
and more developed,
more and more complex.
>> While opposites
can be complementary,
similar properties like harmony
and balance may have important
and significant differences.
>> I want to make a distinction
between harmony and balance.
I know so many
people are searching
for balance in their lives.
The balance between
work and career,
between family and
personal learning.
But I think what's
really important is
to understand that nature
does not work in balance.
Nature works in harmony.
I live in a wilderness
area and there
is a harmony between the
population of rabbits
and the population of coyotes.
There never is a perfect balance
between the number of coyotes
and the number of rabbits,
but there is always a harmony.
As spring arrives and we see
a bumper crop of new bunnies,
all of a sudden we
see more coyotes
show up to check that
larger population.
So there's always the harmony,
but not so much what we
would call a balance.
>> In what ways can we
enhance harmony and coherence
collectively?
>> In the ancient traditions,
they understood that harmonics
was creating resonance between
things so that that could be
not just on the physical
plane but connecting something
on the physical plane to
something on a very specific
level of the higher planes, and
that that creates a harmonic
cascade between the planes.
>> Coherence means everything is
in sync, everything is aligned,
everything is working together,
which is similar effect
as resonance.
Resonance will come in
and then train everything
into that coherent
state, but it will also
amplify it because it hits
those higher harmonics.
>> And this was often
represented with the metaphor
in modern times of a piano, the
complete vibrational spectrum
exists on every plane.
And by finding
that correct note,
let's say a C note,
on the physical plane,
you can make something of
that same vibratory quality
vibrate on a higher plane.
And you can actually
feed the energy
from that object
in the higher plane
into the physical to be
able to transform a person's
consciousness,
person's energy field
to change the energetic
fields around us.
>> And we have that coherent
state as an individual.
But then we also have multiple
people coming together,
each achieving that coherence.
Now, we can have even more
of an amplified effect
upon the field, which then can
affect the physical outcomes
of things.
It can affect matter.
And this is one of the
things that we really
want to see achieved
when we're talking
about a shift in
collective consciousness.
>> Before we unite collectively,
each of us can work
individually to bring ourselves
into a harmonic state.
To understand how
to do this, let's
explore how the body responds
to sound and frequency.
>> It has been found that sound
can indeed affect our brain
waves, which will affect
everything from our heartbeat,
our respiration, all sorts of
different portions of our brain
can be lit up and
activated with sound.
The sound is for the most
part going into our ear,
into our brain, affecting
our nervous system.
This is called psychoacoustics.
A drumbeat, for example,
will go into our ear,
affect your brain,
and affect our heart.
Any different music depending
upon the rhythm, the volume,
and the texture.
>> All of it is according to
the law that we see operating
in music theory.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It's all got to do with why
music and chords and relations
of vibration frequencies
seem to be pleasing to us
or have a powerful
influence on us.
Some place in my
deep unconscious mind
is responding, and
responding emotionally
to a certain set
of frequencies that
happen to fall within a certain
mathematical relationship
to each other like
notes on a piano.
>> Ancient cultures and many
modern scientists and mystics
believe that the universe and
on a smaller scale our Mother
Earth, Gaia, are like expanded
scales of the human being with
all parts of the whole
interconnected symbiotically.
>> The Greeks felt that
the universe is one being,
which they called a Zoan.
This is similar to the
concept from the East of all
of the universe being
the body of Brahma.
Every day we learn more of
how vast the universe is
and how galaxies form
super clusters, which
resemble very much the way
cells in the human body grouped
together.
So we may be observing the
universe from inside the body
from our micro perspective.
>> A lot of the ancient cultures
around the Earth have talked
about the fact that human beings
need to be in synchronicity
with the planet Earth.
The Earth itself has a
human resonant frequency
of about 8.1 Hertz
and the human brain
has a very similar
frequency as well.
>> In Sanskrit, there is
a saying that frequency is
the mother of nature,
and rhythm is its father.
The nature of life
is frequency as it
moves through space such as
our heartbeat, our brainwaves,
sleeping and waking, sunrise
and sunset, daily cycles,
and the larger cycles within a
lifetime, and over many lives.
They are all
manifestations of rhythm.
And because we're born here
in the embryonic stage,
those frequencies and vibrations
are passing through us
as a fetus and is having a
direct effect on our DNA,
on our consciousness.
It's becoming interwoven
into our being itself.
So why aren't we
listening to the Earth?
>> Coming up next on
Sound of Creation.
Edgar Cayce, the most
documented psychic
of the 20th century and
one of the forerunners
of modern holistic
medicine, predicted
that the future of
medicine would be sound.
Join us as we explore
ancient and modern sonic
breakthroughs in our next
episode Healing with Sound.
[MUSIC PLAYING]